Architecture as Code: Virtual Machines (#2783)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/architecture-as-code-vm/index.md

---
title: "Architecture as Code: Virtual Machines"
date: 2020-03-31
meta_desc: "Provisioning virtual machines and redeploying applications on existing instances using Pulumi"
meta_image: vm.png
authors:
    - sophia-parafina
tags:
    - virtual machines
    - provisioning
---

> In a [previous article](https://www.pulumi.com/blog/architecture-as-code-intro/), we presented an overview of four infrastructure patterns for deploying modern applications. The article reviewed virtual machines, serverless, Kubernetes, and microservices. In this post, we'll examine virtual machines in-depth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a [previous article]({{< relref "/blog/architecture-as-code-intro" >}}), we presented an overview of four infrastructure patterns for deploying modern applications. The article reviewed virtual machines, serverless, Kubernetes, and microservices. In this post, we'll examine virtual machines in-depth.
```

<!--more-->

## The Minimum Virtual Machine

Whether you choose to build a virtual machine using VMWare or from a cloud service provider such as AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud Platform, they require three resources. First, the instance itself must be configured to meet application requirements. Second, network access for maintaining the instance and for applications. And finally, storage for application data.

> 

Author: fixed

Let's start with the EC2 provisioner example, which is available on [Github](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/tree/master/aws-ts-ec2-provisioners). Make an empty directory and clone the example in the directory using `pulumi new`.

```bash

> $ mkdir virtual_machine

Reviewer: Sorry, missing this. Should we also include the `cd`?

```suggestion
$ mkdir virtual_machine && cd virtual_machine
```

Author: good catch

$ pulumi new https://github.com/pulumi/examples/tree/master/aws-ts-ec2-provisioners
```

Follow the instructions to create an OpenSSH keypair and set them as secrets, we'll need them to log into and provision the VM. Let's take a look at the code. The first part configures the VM with the OpenSSH keys that we stored as secrets in the Pulumi configuration file (Pulumi.dev.yaml).

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps worth adding "Follow the instructions in the README.md"

> 

Reviewer 2: perhaps specify location of instructions (readme) and code (index.ts)?

// Create an EC2 server that we'll then provision stuff onto.
const size = "t2.micro";
if (!keyName) {
   const key = new aws.ec2.KeyPair("key", { publicKey });
   keyName = key.keyName;
}

const server = new aws.ec2.Instance("server", {
   instanceType: size,
   ami: amiId,
   keyName: keyName,
   vpcSecurityGroupIds: [ secgrp.id ],

});
```

Next, let's add storage to our virtual machine using AWS Elastic Block Storage and attach it to our EC2 instance. Add the following code after the virtual machine is created. The code creates a 10 GB volume and attaches it to our virtual machine via the `instanceId` property.

```ts
// Add EBS storage.
const ebsvolume = new aws.ebs.Volume("vm", {
   availabilityZone: "us-west-2a",
   size: 10,
   tags: {
       Name: "vm_volume",
   },
});

// Attach storage to the virtual machine.
const ebsAtt = new aws.ec2.VolumeAttachment("ebsAtt", {
   deviceName: "/dev/sdh",
   instanceId: server.id,
   volumeId: ebsvolume.id,
});
```

Now we have a virtual machine that can receive HTTP and HTTPS requests and allows outbound network traffic so that we can update and install software via the package manager.

## Provisioning with Dynamic Providers

> Provisioning a VM when it's created by running user-supplied scripts is straightforward. For example, AWS EC2 instances have a userData parameter that allows you to specify an inline script that runs when the instance starts. But what if you need to copy and execute scripts on the virtual machine without replacing the instance?

Reviewer 2: Consider replacing 'straightforward' with 'relatively straightforward' or something else novice friendly?

Author: accepted

> This where you can use Pulumi’s [dynamic provider]({{< relref "/docs/intro/concepts/programming-model#dynamicproviders" >}}) to provision existing instances. Dynamic providers enable creating custom resource types, such as provisioners, within the source code of your Pulumi program. They let you execute arbitrary code during the deployment process. Dynamic provisioners run during resource provisioning, and enables adding custom logic to a deployment workflow during the create, read, update, or delete steps of a Pulumi program.

Reviewer 2: enables adding >> enable adding

 pg_catalog | pg_amop                         | table | postgres
 pg_catalog | pg_amproc                       | table | postgres
 pg_catalog | pg_attrdef                      | table | postgres
 pg_catalog | pg_attribute                    | table | postgres
 pg_catalog | pg_auth_members                 | table | postgres
 pg_catalog | pg_authid                       | table | postgres
...

postgres=# \q
-bash-4.2$ logout
```

## Conclusion

We can deploy and configure virtual machines programmatically using scripts and a CLI. However, updating existing instances can be onerous because it would require logging into each instance to update them. With Pulumi, we can use a dynamic provider to create a provisioner that can provision and configure an existing virtual machine. In this post, we walked through how to create a virtual machine with storage, starting from an [example on Github](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/tree/master/aws-ts-ec2-provisioners). We then installed PostgreSQL using a provisioner that copied configuration files, and an installation script then ran the script, all without creating a new virtual machine.

> We have more virtual machine examples for other cloud providers. Checkout:

Reviewer 2: Checkout >> Check out
